this is may the first we're sitting in the former students of the williams building the cleaton williams building getting ready to chat with jerry cooper jerry test yours now well i don't know what to say i guess we could add on there that i'm class of 63. okay
Jerry, for the sake of someone who may hear this tape or read the transcription in the years to come and might not be acquainted with you, give a biographical summary of your growing up.
Where did you grow up?
Where did you go to high school?
What happened to you before you came to College Station as a student?
I was born in Houston and moved to Texas City when I was finishing elementary school.
So I went to junior high and high school in Texas City.
And from there, I came directly to A&M after a summer out at Junction.
And I stayed here for about two and a half years.
And Hurricane Carla hit down on the coast.
And I spent some time down there at the beginning of the semester trying to help clean up.
And I thought after I got back up here that I was catching up and doing what I was supposed to do, but my grades didn't reflect it at the end of the semester, so I laid out of school for two years and worked in Houston.
And then I came back, that was in 62, came back in 64, and I finished up another two and a half years and graduated in 66.
Okay.
I was originally class of 63.
Let's back up.
As a historian, I've got to ask, and I presume you were too young to remember the Texas City explosion.
Well, my parents remember.
We lived in Houston at that time, and they remember the windows shaking up there, but no, we weren't there.
But we did end up getting to know an awful lot of people who did live through it.
Matter of fact, my wife was one of them.
All right, one of the important first questions.
Why did you come to Texas A&M?
Why here instead of some other place?
That's an easy choice.
My dad went to school here for about one year and then had to drop out and go to work in Houston.
And he always told people that the worst kind of Aggies were the ones that only went for a short time because he said they talked the loudest and the longest about the place.
I mean, I was probably hardly out of diapers before we were singing the Aggie War hymn and learning all the
various campusology things about A&M and of course I followed my brother up here.
He preceded me by about three years.
So you came to visit many times?
Oh yes, came a lot of weekends.
One of the funniest tales was we came up for a football weekend and of course I was riding with a lot of girls who were dating Aggies and a next door neighbor of ours was in the car and we're going down the street and we're seeing all these corps members in uniform walking around
And she blurts out, she says, gee, I wish they'd take their uniforms off so I could tell who they are.
We never did let her live that one down.
So you don't remember then your first visit because you may have come as a little bitty child.
Well, probably I was junior high school age.
I may have been up here before that, but that was when my brother came up here as I was finishing junior high and
That's my earliest real recollection, going in the Koch building when he went to register and get his paperwork straightened out.
You graduate from high school and go to Junction that summer.
That summer.
Describe the Junction Annex, as I think we called it then.
Describe that place physically.
Where was it and what was there?
Well, driving into it, it was fairly pleasant.
There were a lot of large trees, and they had these barracks-type screened-in buildings with ten roofs on them.
And, of course, we'd all read the stories about Bear Bryant taking his players out there, and we kind of figured the worst was going to happen, but it really was pretty nice.
We didn't have to get out and play football on the hardscrabble ground.
We got to go swimming in the river and
did a lot of other activities while we were there besides taking classes.
These barracks, these small little huts or whatever, what did you all call them?
I'm not sure if we had a name for them.
I don't remember.
Those little buildings, were they army surplus?
They appear to be, yeah.
I couldn't tell you for sure about that.
They were just very spare buildings with bunk beds in them and
And then, of course, they had a mess hall and another meeting hall area.
This was on the river south of Junction?
I guess it was south.
Yeah, I think so.
About how far to town?
Oh, it was probably about a five-minute drive to town, not very far out.
Describe the beginning.
How were you received, you and the others?
How were you welcomed?
Well, I'm not...
I'm sure my memory is too strong on all of that.
The basic division was something that was in effect at A&M back then to counsel freshmen, and they pretty much ran the program out there.
Let's see, I was trying to think of some of the people, I just can't call names right now.
Austin Curley?
Well, Austin Curley was of course there, and a gentleman whose name started with a K.
It just won't come to me right now, but he was pretty much the ramrod of the whole place at that time.
And Bob Barzak was one of the instructors in English out there.
And I don't know.
I don't have a whole lot of vivid memories.
About how many students?
Oh, let's see.
There were about four or five barracks buildings and probably about
Oh, maybe 15 people in each one.
So less than 100?
Yeah, I think so, about 100.
Now, how did you and those others, how did you get selected to go out to Junction?
Well, we applied for it, and I think we had to meet some kind of a deadline and all, but it was just submitting an application, and I don't know that there was a whole lot of other criteria other than first come, first serve.
What courses did you take?
Oh, they were very basic.
I think English and math and I've got it on the transcript in there.
I can probably show you that we took seven hours including our PE and I got an A in that for teaching three other guys how to swim while we were there.
But I got pretty good grade points in all of my classes then and freshman year,
I didn't do too well after I got to the campus, and if it wasn't for those grade points, I might have dropped out a few years earlier.
Can you describe a routine of the typical class day out at Junction?
What time did you get up?
What happened when?
Oh, I think we probably got up about, I don't know, 7, 7.30 and went to breakfast, and then probably had classes about 8 or 8.30,
I think we had classes mostly in the morning, and then in the afternoon we had recreation periods and other activity things that were taking place.
And you were so far from town, there couldn't be much mischief on the road, could there?
Well, no.
About the only people that went into town, there was one boy who lived in Junction, Robbie Carpenter, and I think he's a dentist out there now, but Robbie used to
drive his truck in and then he'd occasionally walk out and one night he walked in and he was dragging something behind him and we didn't know what it was till we got up close and it was about a six-foot rattlesnake that he had found along the road and he had beat it in the head and dragged it back up there just to show us what we could expect if we went out on the road ourselves.
You mentioned Bill Barzak.
Were there any other teachers you had that summer that were
I've racked my brain trying to remember them.
I'm sorry, I can't come up.
You were there six weeks or 12 weeks?
I think it was just about a six weeks period.
Okay.
And then back home.
Because they had, I think, two sessions in the summer.
All right.
Describe then coming up to College Station that fall.
How did you get here and what did you bring and how were you welcomed?
Well, we came up and there was about a week's orientation before the classes and all got underway.
And they would give us orientation sessions in our different outfits.
They would try to teach us how to start forming up so that we could learn how to march.
And, of course, we had our meals in the mess hall.
And one of the things I remember the most was a junior in my brother's outfit dropped handles with me.
He was the first guy that ever dropped handles with me at A&M, which, as most anybody knows, is calling you by your first name and letting you call him by his first name instead of Mr. And that was Paul Martin, who was...
been with the Jaworski Law Firm down in Houston for some years now.
As a matter of fact, he may be retiring now.
But that was one of my early memories.
And it was mostly just getting acquainted and learning.
We didn't have any sophomores around to speak of at that time.
It was mostly juniors and seniors that were orienting us.
So the sophomores, we didn't learn what they were going to be about until the next week or two.
Mom and Dad brought you.
Oh, yes, brought me, unloaded all the stuff in the car and helped me get it up in the room.
And where did you, where was your room?
I was in Moses Hall.
We had, I think it was the second and third floors of Moses Hall.
And same dorm my nephew lives in right now, by the way.
And my brother was in the next dorm, Davis Gary Hall.
Back then, we didn't call them by names.
It was dorms.
14, dorm 17.
I mean, that's the only way we knew them, by numbers.
What outfit?
I was in A2.
How did you get assigned to that?
Do you know?
I think they tried to split people up according to what their major was.
And at that time, I was going to be a mechanical engineer.
That lasted for about one semester until chemistry got a hold of me.
And so it didn't take very long for their pairing people up with people in their particular discipline to change rapidly.
And each outfit, I'm sure, had the same thing happen.
They ended up being kind of a hodgepodge of different majors.
Now, because of your brother's experience and your father, you knew pretty well what to bring when you came.
Well, they gave us a list, I think, of the type of clothes and stuff and told us what sort of uniform pieces would be issued to us.
What did you bring other than what was on that list?
Oh, gosh.
Did you bring a radio?
Well, I later had a record player, one of those large console types.
desktop record players.
I don't remember bringing too much of anything else.
Typewriter?
No, no typewriter back then, although I probably could have used it.
No furnishings?
Not to speak of, except for bed linens and a few things like that.
All right, and so you're oriented for a week or so, and then everybody gets here.
And then we started finding out what it was all about.
All right, describe those discoveries, some experiences.
Well, you know, most people out of high school, unless they've been in ROTC or something, they've probably never experienced having regimentation, and we were pretty solidly regimented.
We were told what to do, when to do it, and oftentimes how to do it, and then given a long list of things we better not do.
And of course, the best lesson I learned, or maybe the worst, if you want to look at it that way, was when they told us that it was a freshman's privilege to do anything you could get away with.
And of course, we learned a lot about how to get away with things.
Can you share any of the incidents that were the first encounters with the sophomores and their attempts to get you all to be in line?
I don't know about the first ones, but I remember some of the encounters for sure.
Describe those.
Well, they would try to come up with something that at least one freshman had done wrong, and then they would try to say they didn't know who did it and try to blame it on everybody.
They'd take us down to the shower and we'd put on our rain ponchos and our helmet liners wearing virtually nothing else underneath and they'd turn the steam showers up.
And we'd sit in there and just sweat until they decided to turn it off and let us back out of there.
And we went through a number of those incidents.
Did that have a name?
I've never heard of a sweat out or anything.
Well, the common term I think we used back then was crap out.
A crap out?
That was the hot treatment?
The steam treatment?
The idea was maybe somebody's not going to make it out of there without being carried.
But it taught you togetherness a lot and made you realize that you had to depend on each other.
And I don't know if my feelings were justified or not, but having a brother who was a senior in another outfit
seemed to be viewed by a lot of my fellow freshmen in my outfit as some sort of privilege that I was able to get out of things.
And as opposed to what they thought that I was enjoying, it really was harder because the other upperclassmen, particularly sophomores that might have happened to run across my brother at the wrong time of day or something, made my life pretty uncomfortable a lot of times.
But they weren't the only ones.
I remember one instance where I was walking to class and I didn't have the good sense enough to break and run and I ended up marching all the way across campus with two sophomores and going into dorm
four I believe, no three, dorm three I think it was, and spent the entire afternoon doing push-ups and sit-ups and pink stool and all sorts of things there.
And the only thing I really remember, I can't even remember the names of the guys who ran me through most of that stuff, but the room we were in belonged to Tom Ralph.
Tom was a Yale leader who later died in Vietnam.
And the main thing I remembered about him was that after a while he got tired of it and he told me just to get the hell out of there.
And that was the only chance I had to leave because I think they'd have chased me down the hall before I got out of the dorm.
Do you remember when you first had a paddle applied to your posterior?
Well, that was done mostly in, you know, I won't say in jest, but
It was a fun kind of thing in that our sophomores toward the end of the year would bend us over and spell out their names on our rear end and then drop handles with us.
As far as anybody really using a board on anybody maliciously, it really didn't happen.
And the only thing you had to worry about is that
a whole lot of guys didn't drop handles with you on the same day.
I see.
Now, in dropping handles, describe the ceremony of that.
Did somebody walk up and say something special?
Usually it was just in conversation sometime that if a guy felt like it, he would just, you'd say something to him about yes sir, no sir, or something like that, or you'd call him by name, Mr. So-and-so.
and usually the way it would happen would he'd say, how about just calling me by my first name, or how about calling me Dan or whatever it was, and that was it.
And you'd turn around and say, sure, thanks, and shake hands with him, and from then on it would be first name basis.
In retrospect, did that attention to learning people's names, did that prove to be a good capability?
Well, it did.
probably while I was here, but I think some sort of psychological misdirection.
Ever since then, and I don't know if it's a backlash from having to do it then, I haven't paid nearly as much attention to remembering people's names as I should.
So I guess I could have turned it into something more positive, but it helped me for a long time.
All right, now, your freshman year is the fall of?
1959.
59.
You and I then are here, we arrived at the same time.
We're both freshmen.
Describe registration.
Registration, well, of course, for freshmen, it was pretty much laid out for you.
I don't know, I don't think that first semester we went through formal registration.
I think they pretty much signed us up for the classes we needed to take through the basic division.
But from that point on, starting with the spring semester, we would have to get in a long line out on the sidewalks around Cebisa and wait our turn to go in and walk through the tables and register.
And it was set up where you first met with the counselors.
Then you went to the fee people and talked to them about what you were going to need to do.
And then you went and signed up for your classes.
And I think you came to another fee table further down where they added everything up and put your bill out and you made your payment or your installment payment.
And that was long and time consuming.
I think anybody from the late 50s and early 50s will remember those lines around Cebisa and how long you stood out in the sun.
Now, one of the advantages I thought at that time was that the student made direct contact, though,
with some faculty member in the department where each of the courses was going to be taken.
Yes.
And they could eliminate a lot of mistakes that a student might have made by taking the wrong course.
Well, I think we had to take our classes.
Once we got signed up for everything, we had to go back and have it checked by checkers, and they would look through to see what it was.
And I think some of them did that sort of thing, others just
check to make sure you didn't have too many total hours and that you weren't signed up for some class where you had to be at this side of campus one hour and the next hour over here where you weren't going to make it to class.
As you went to those first classes, what did you, what was the routine in the classes for a first year freshman?
How were they, what was the methodology, the standard of instruction?
Well, a lot of them except for engineering drawing and things like that were primarily lecture classes.
And so mostly it was just a matter of listening to the professor and taking notes or trying to keep up with what he was doing in the book as he went along.
I'm afraid I was not very well versed in study habits back then, and so I probably should, if I'd have done what I should have done, I'd probably remember a whole lot more about it.
How large were the enrollments in the various sections you took?
I think most of the classes, except for chemistry, were like about...
Oh, probably 30 people, 25, 30.
Were they real faculty members or were they teaching assistants?
I remember most of the classes were taught by faculty members.
I don't remember too many teaching assistants except in areas like chemistry lab and things of that nature.
About how many hours did you take?
Do you remember that first year?
That first semester I was up here, I probably took about 15, maybe 14 or 15.
Did you have any of the legendary teachers either that semester or some other early semesters?
Well, the only one I remember having was Screamin' Al Nelson, and you could hear him all the way down the hall.
And the thing I remember most, when I probably should have been remembering some of the things he was really teaching,
was his stories about going down to Mexico and being shanghaied by highway bandits.
And he was a pretty colorful tale-teller.
He did yell a lot.
I know because I had a class across the hall from him one time.
But in general, was he a highly capable teacher?
Haskell, I really, I would,
This probably isn't fair to him, but I would probably classify him as average.
I think he spent an awful lot of time on things other than the subject matter.
Now, I remember him as being very wrapped up in being anti-liberal.
Franklin Roosevelt and other communists, I heard him say a couple of times,
I'm sorry I can't address very much of that because I was not a real good student back then.
Art, describe chow hall for a freshman.
Where did y'all eat and what was the routine and so forth?
Well, we lived on the north side there and so we ate in Sabisa Dining Hall upstairs and it was served family style and we had
seating arrangements.
I know my table had four freshmen, two sophomores, a junior, and a senior at it.
And the thing I recall the most, of course, let me describe for you a little bit what the meal was like.
The tables were all set with the, you know, the eating utensils and everything.
And the mess hall waiters, we called them the Cebiza volunteers,
would bring out family-sized bowls and place a couple of them on each table for you to serve yourself from.
And, of course, you had to make sure the senior was served first, and then it went to the junior and then to the sophomores.
And if you were lucky, you got some before it had to be sent back to the kitchen to be refilled.
And, of course, the thing you looked forward to the most at meals was Cush.
And, of course, we had Cush questions.
Well, I say we had cush questions.
We did that for quite a while where we were asked something and we'd have to answer it to be able to qualify to eat dessert.
But after a while they hit upon this idea that each one of us freshmen was supposed to bring a different new fact to the table at every meal.
This was three times a day, seven days a week for a semester or two.
And by the time
you know, a month or so had gone by, we'd run through an awful lot of basic facts about A&M to tell to get our cush.
All right, these were facts about A&M.
About A&M.
Mostly out of the campusology book or other places.
And I was real proud one day because I had just been over to visit Jay Gordon Gay at the YMCA, and he told me about A&M getting, I think, its first Fulbright Scholar.
And that was my fact for the evening.
But we covered an awful lot of history about this place, and that's probably why I'm so ingrained with what has gone on at A&M.
Did anybody ever make up one successfully?
A non-existent?
I'm sure there were some that were questionable, but I don't think anybody ever caught them on it.
Let's back up to Cush questions.
Can you share as many Cush questions as you can remember?
Well, they'd ask you things like, where's the left hand?
What's the correct answer?
Well, right north of the main drill field, the Simpson drill field now, there's a little water faucet sitting beside the sidewalk.
And for some reason or other, the handle on that water faucet has to turn backwards from most other faucets.
So they had embedded a little metal plate in the ground right next to that water faucet that said left hand.
And we had to know where that was.
Or the stairs that go to nowhere.
Over in Bagley Hall,
At some point in time, they had closed up the top of the main staircase and just closed it with a wall to, I guess, make a larger room out of that top floor.
And so we had to find the stairs that went to nowhere.
And if you kept walking up the stairs, you just ran into the wall.
Oh, gosh, there were all sorts of questions.
Were there some for which there was no answer?
Oh, I'm sure there were.
Because I heard one the other day, how many stars are there in the Texas flag?
And if you answer one... One, they'll tell you it's two, one on each side.
Yes, they pull those things on us.
And of course, we had to learn how many stars there were in the Aggie ring.
At one time, they asked us how many dimples there were on the bottom, which are supposed to represent the rear end of the people over at the University of Texas.
But...
Of course, that changed depending on how long somebody had had their ring.
If it was new, it probably was a totally different number than if they'd worn in a little while.
All right, so that the evening meal, was it normally the evening meal where the cush questions and the facts were shared?
Usually, because in the morning and at noon, you had classes to get to, and they didn't have a lot of time to waste.
We were in and out of there pretty fast for those two meals.
As you look back on the experiences of that first fall, did that help to kind of broaden a young freshman's outlook on life?
Well, after I got my first grades, it broadened my impression a great deal about what was required academically to be up here.
And we kind of had a saying back then that anybody could get in A&M, but you had to work to stay there.
And it was true.
I mean, they didn't let you slide by in any area.
Even the geology course I took once, it was supposed to be a grade point course.
It became a non-grade point course the year I took it.
I got a lot of advice, which didn't turn out to help much.
Let's see.
Don't want to pass up the food nicknames.
Oh, yeah.
Well, you know, bread was deal, like you're dealing cards.
Mustard, which you didn't like to say with guests at the table, was called baby.
And ketchup was after birth, or stewed tomatoes, really.
And let's see.
Milk.
Milk was a cow.
And water was sky.
Tea.
Was that horse?
It may have been.
I'm not sure.
I have to go back.
Beans.
Beans were artillery.
Meat.
Meat was bull neck.
What about...
other than beef or ham?
They were still called bull neck.
Okay.
Was there one for fish?
I think it was still bull.
Anything that was your meat dish for the meal was bull neck.
Let's see, potatoes?
They were spuds, of course.
Okay.
Greens?
Lemon was sour.
Greens.
I can't remember that one.
I see.
Butter.
Well, I remember that cottage cheese was duck butter.
Butter, what did we call butter?
It just won't come to me right now.
I've heard a few stories about a youngster going home, maybe Thanksgiving, the first fall, and forgetting.
Did that happen to you?
I don't recall it happening to me.
I'm sure my brother probably joked and told me that I better watch my language while I was eating at home.
But no, I don't think I slipped up on that.
As you and your buddies those first semesters were eating at the table, was there conversation involving everybody?
Or did you just sit there and eat?
As we had been there longer, things got more relaxed.
But most of the time, we were expected to sit there, ramrod straight in our chairs and eat our meal.
And we weren't even supposed to turn our heads to the left or right.
I mean, if you were passing something, you did it out of the corner of your eye to someone.
And...
Of course, one guy at each table was at a certain corner of the table was declared the hot corner, and it was his responsibility to make sure that if any of the bowls on the table got empty or anything, that he got the waiter's attention and got him over there to get him a new supply.
And talking about Cush a while ago, we had Cush hounds.
Well, meal hounds were people who just stayed after everybody else finished eating and went around.